#pointers #c #dereferencing

Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zuegQmMdy8M
Timestamp: 0:00 -> 22:06

# Memory
Memory usually refers to random access memory (RAM). Each byte in memory has an **address**.

There are so many addresses available in memory, that they are typically represented in hexadecimal, as it is unwieldy to represent them in base 10 (decimal).

When programming, when declaring a variable with a specific type, an amount of memory will be allocated depending on the variable's type, e.g.,:

- `int`s are usually given 4 bytes.
- `char`s are usually given 1 byte.
- `float`s are usually given 4 bytes.
- and so on.

The variable will be placed somewhere in memory. The computer has a lookup table which stores information about the variable, such as its type and where it is stored in memory.

When assigning memory to a variable, the computer will search for free space in memory to assign. It keeps an internal structure to store information about the variable. The values themselves, in the memory proper, are stored in binary format.

# Where pointers come in
Pointers are variables that store the address of another variable.

Let's say at offset 204, we have a variable `a`, an `int`, assigned the value of `4`.

We can introduce a new variable `p`. `p` can store the **address** of `a`. `p` itself uses memory to store the reference of the offset at which `a` is stored.

# C example
A variable can be declared like this:

```c
int a;
a = 5;
```

`a` does not need to be assigned a *value* (`5`) in order to access its memory address. The provisioning of memory space happens on the `int a` line.

A pointer can be declared like this:

```c
int *p;
```

And we can assign a pointer like this:

```c
p = &a;
```

The ampersand (`&`) designates that we want to access the location in memory at which `a` is stored.

You can also access the memory location of the pointer itself:

```c
printf("%x", &p);
```

> [!INFO]
> Pointers are still statically-typed. The type of your pointer must match the type of variable you wish to 'point' to.

### Exercise: If we wanted to assign `&p` to a variable, how would we declare the type of that variable?
It would look something like this:

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main()
{
  int a = 10;
  int *p = &a;

  int **pp = &p;

  printf("Dereferenced p = %d\n", **pp); // prints: "Dereferenced p = 10"
}

```

The double asterisk indicates that we are talking about a 'pointer to a pointer'. The use of the double asterisk on the `printf` line shows that we are dereferencing both pointers.


# Dereferencing
This is another important property of pointers. You can also put an asterisk (`*`) in front of a pointer. This will give you the **underlying value of the variable the pointer is 'pointing' to.**

Using the above example, `*p` will return `5`, because `p` points to `a`, and the value of `a` is `5`.

If we didn't assign a value to `a`, dereferencing `p` would return some garbage value.

> [!NOTE]
> This is known as pointer dereferencing. It is a very important concept.

# Code Example
In the code below, the last `printf` line will return `12`, as we re-assigned the value of `a` via its pointer, `p`:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
  int a;
  int *p;
  a = 10;
  p = &a;
  printf("a = %d\n", a);
  *p = 12;
  printf("a = %d\n", a); // 12!
}
```
# Pointer Arithmetic
Arithmetic operations on a pointer are valid code. Let's consider the example below. Let's assume for the sake of brevity, that `p` is given the value `2002`:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
int main ()
{
  int a = 10;
  int *p;
  p = &a;
  printf("%d\n", p);
  printf("%d\n", p+1);
}
```

When incrementing `p` on the last line, what do you think the value will become? `2003`?

No, the value won't be `2003` because incrementing a pointer in this manner **increments the pointer by the size of the underlying data type**, rather than just by one singular byte.

This is to take us to the 'next' `int` in memory, assuming it is contiguous.

We can view the size of a data type by using `sizeof`:

```c
printf("Size of integer is %d bytes\n", sizeof(int))
```

What happens if we increment by `2` instead? The pointer will be incremented by the `sizeof` an `int`, times `2`.

Like before, if we try incrementing a pointer before the underlying value it's referencing has been assigned, we'll get a garbage value.

This is one of the dangers of C. You can, theoretically, reach any address, and this may introduce unwanted behaviour into your program.
