#pointer-to-pointer #generic-pointers #pointers #c #pointer-casting

Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zuegQmMdy8M&t=1327s

# Typing and pointers

Pointer variables are strongly-typed. For example, an `int*` pointer can ONLY store a pointer of an underlying `int` variable.

This also applies to more complex data structures and user-defined types.

One of the main purposes of pointers is to *dereference* the underlying values to access and modify them.

# Addresses and pointers

When we print a pointer's value, it will return the 'first' contiguous byte address of the underlying data type.

When we deference a pointer via `*`, the pointer's type tells the compiler how many bytes we want to retrieve from memory when grabbing the value.

# Casting

We can cast pointers to different types. Remember, `int`s are 4 bytes, and `char`s are 1 byte.

We can cast an `int` pointer to the `char` type:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
  int a = 1025;
  int *p;
  p = &a;
  printf("address = %d, value = %d\n", p, *p);

  char *p0;
  p0 = (char*)p; // remember, p is an integer pointer, so without the cast here, the program would not compile. (char*) tells the compiler we want to cast to a character pointer.
  printf("address = %d, value = %d\n", p0, *p0); // this prints a random address and a value of 1.
}
```

Why does this print a value of 1? It has everything to do with the **value** we assigned to `a`, `1025`. It is retrieving the value of the least significant byte in the `int`. Our bytes are `1024` + `1`, so it is retrieving the least significant byte.

> [!NOTE]
> An `int` is implicitly signed, so one of the bits implies the 'sign' - i.e., positive or negative.

# Accessing different bytes

We can also use the pointer to access different bytes in the memory. Consider this code:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
  int a = 1025;
  int *p;
  p = &a;
  printf("address = %d, value = %d\n", p, *p);

  char *p0;
  p0 = (char*)p;
  printf("address = %d, value = %d\n", p0, *p0);

  printf("address = %d, value = %d\n", p0 + 1, *(p0 + 1));
}
```

Here, the `p0 + 1` is incrementing the address (at the pointer) by `1`, so we are moving to the next byte in the data structure. An `int` is 4 bytes, so we move up to the next byte, or the 'second-least-significant byte'.

`*(p0 + 1)` is dereferencing the value at the address - i.e., it is retrieving the **value** at `p0 + 1`.

# Generic pointers

In C, generic pointers are known as `void` pointers. We can declare them like this:

```c
void *p0;
```

Void pointers cannot be dereferenced - attempting to do so will result in a compilation error. You can only access the address here.

# Pointer-to-pointer

A pointer records the memory address at which the underlying variable is stored. So, a statement like `int *p = &a` will store the memory address at which `a` is stored.

However, that reference itself is also stored in memory. So, `p` has a unique address to `a`. We can also store the memory location of `p` in another pointer, or a 'pointer-to-a-pointer'. Let's call this new pointer `q`. `q` will have type `int**` to say we want a 'pointer-to-a-pointer of type `int`'.

We are not limited to two asterisks in the chain here. Here's a brief example:

```c
int main()
{
  int x = 5;
  int *p = &x;
  int **q = &p;
  int ***r = &q;
}
```

We can dereference `q` like so:

```c
printf("%d\n", *(*q));
```
> [!NOTE]
> The parenthesis is optional, but helps to avoid UB.

