#pointers #call-by-reference #memory-allocation #heap #stack

# Use cases of pointers

Pointers can be used as function arguments. We also call this 'call by reference.'

Consider this code:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
void increment(int a)
{
  a = a + 1;
}

int main()
{
  int a;
  a = 10;
  increment(a);
  printf("a = %d\n");
}
```
This is known as a call-by-value. **It is not a call-by-reference.**

Running this code will print `10`, not `11` as we might expect. This is because when we pass by value (i.e., passing `a` and not a pointer to `a`), the value is *replicated* in the function. We aren't dealing with `a` itself.

We can fix this problem by passing a reference (i.e., a pointer) to `a` to our function:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
void increment(int *a)
{
  *a = *a + 1;
}

int main()
{
  int a;
  a = 10;
  increment(&a);
  printf("a = %d\n");
}
```

**This is an example of call-by-reference.**

# Memory allocation for programs

When you run a program on a computer, the computer will assign a chunk of memory to that application. The application's memory is usually divided into four distinct parts:

* Heap
* Stack
* Static/Global
* Code

Static/Global variables are initialised outside of any functions.

The stack is where local variables are stored. Local variables are the variables that exist inside of the runnable blocks of your program, such as functions.

Each function being executed is assigned a subsection of it, called a stack 'frame'.

The stack is a first-in-first-out structure, so the latest function put onto the stack will be resolved first.

Variables in a stack frame only exist for the lifetime of the function being run.

The stack is fixed in size. If you have a function that endlessly calls another function, you will get a 'stack overflow' error, because the program can't assign any more frames to the stack, as the stack is full. Or, the stack is *overflowing!*

In the code example in the previous section, we haven't assigned anything to the heap (we do that with `malloc`). We are just passing references throughout frames in the stack.
