#strings #character-arrays #pointers

# Strings

In C, a `string` is represented as an array of characters.

In many applications, there are lots of operations we want to perform on strings.

To work with strings efficiently in strings, we need to understand character arrays.

# Properties of character arrays

We first need to ensure that our character arrays are large enough to store the string we want.

The size of our array should always be **greater than or equal to the number of characters in the string, plus 1.**

This is because every string needs to be *terminated*. We want to do this because the length of our string, in terms of characters, is not always equal to the length of our character array. Therefore, we need to tell the computer when our string has ended.

After the final character in the character array, we add a `NULL` character. `'\/0'`

> [!NOTE]
> This is called null-termination.

So, let's take this code:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
  char C[4];
  C[0] = "J";
  C[1] = "O";
  C[2] = "H";
  C[3] = "N";
  printf("%s", C);
}
```

This code would print a bunch of garbage in addition to "JOHN". We want to null-terminate this string.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>
int main()
{
  char C[5];
  C[0] = "J";
  C[1] = "O";
  C[2] = "H";
  C[3] = "N";
  C[4] = '\0';
  printf("%s", C);
  printf("String length: %u", strlen(C));
}
```

This would work much better. As strings are always expected to be null-terminated, the last line will print "4" - as in, the string `C` is of length 4, even though we allocated 5 bytes as the length of the underlying array. This is because string methods are able to see the null-termination character and recognise the string has finished.

We can still view the length of the character array, but we'd have to use `sizeof`.

There is some syntactic sugar for initialising strings in C. We can declare a string of characters without the braces, and the null-termination character will be added for us.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>
int main()
{
  char C[5] = "JOHN";
  printf("String length: %lu\n", strlen(C));
  printf("Array length: %lu\n", sizeof(C));
}
```

# Character arrays and pointers

Arrays and pointers are different, discrete types that are used in a similar manner.

This is valid C code:

```c
char C1[6] = "Hello";
char *C2;
C2 = C1;
```

`C2` will evaluate to point to the first element of the `C1` array.

You can also access elements in the array via the pointer!

```c
C2[0] = "A"; // "Aello"
// C2[i] is == *(C2 + i)
```

We cannot, however, assign an array to a pointer variable:

```c
C1 = C2; // Error.
```

# Traversing arrays

We can actually traverse arrays using a `while` directive, however, we MUST be certain that a null character exists in the array. Otherwise, we can 'keep going' past the intended end of the string and into unintended memory locations.

```c
void print(char* C)
{
  int i = 0;
  while (C[i] != '\0')
  {
    printf("%c", C[i]);
    i++;
  }
  printf("\n");
}

int main()
{
  char C[20] = "Hello";
  print(C);
}
```
