#pointers #arrays

# Accessors

Assuming `A` is an array, and `i` is a value referencing an index in the array: 

`*(A+i) is the same as A[i]`
and
`(A+i) is the same as &A[i]`

# Multi-dimensional Arrays

If you have a two-dimensional array, you can think of this an 'array of arrays'. 

You can declare them like this:

```c
int B[2][3];
```

Here, `B[0]` and `B[1]` are 1-D arrays consisting of 3 integers.

We need to be careful here because our program won't work if we attempt to assign our 2-D array to an integer pointer.

```c
int *p = B; // compilation error!
```
```

```

This happens because the pointer we coded isn't explicitly being told that it's pointing to an array of a certain size. As each element in B is an array of 3 integers, we want to set the pointer to the size of each inner array:

```c
int (*p)[3] = B; // this is okay
```

# Visualising the memory

As we know, an `int` is sized at 4 bytes. So, if `B[0]` begins at offset 400 in memory, and each element in `B` is an array of 3 `int`s, then we know that `B[1]` will start at `(400) + 4 * 3`, or `412`.

So, here, these two statements would be equal:

```c
printf("%x", &B[0]); // 400
printf("%x", &B[0][0]); // 400
```

So, what would happen if we printed `B+1`? Well, `B` is typed as consisting of an array of 3 integers. We wouldn't get the next value in the first array, we'd actually get the starting value of the *next array* in `B`, or `412`.

Then, how can we get to the next element in the array using pointers? We can dereference our `B+1`:

```c
*(B+1) // will return the next value in the first array.
```

This is because we are dereferencing the implicit pointer to `B`, which gives us an integer pointer, and then we are incrementing that pointer, which moves us to the next set of `4` bytes (the size of a single integer) in the dereferenced array.

# Knowledge check

Here is my array `B`:

```text
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Element | B[0][0] | B[0][1] | B[0][2] | B[1][0] | B[1][1] | B[1][2] |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Offset  | 400     | 404     | 408     | 412     | 416     | 420     |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Value   | 2       | 3       | 6       | 4       | 5       | 8       |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Array   | B[0]                        | B[1]                        |
+---------+-----------------------------+-----------------------------+
```

Q: What would happen if we accessed `*(B+1)+2`?

A: It would give us `420`. This is because `*(B+1)` will give us the offset of the second element in `B`, which we know is at `412`. Then, as our dereferenced value is a pointer, we are incrementing that pointer by 2, or the size of 2 integers. Therefore, it would move us up `4+4` bytes and we'd land on `420`.

> [!NOTE]
> Remember that *(B+1) is just alternate syntax to `B[1]`.

Q: What would happen if we accessed `*(*B+1)`?

A: This would give us the value at `B[0][1]`, which is `3`. This is because `(*B+1)` is taking a pointer to B and incrementing *that* pointer. That pointer is an integer pointer, so it's giving us the offset of the second integer in the first array. Then, the asterisk outside the brackets is *dereferencing* that pointer, i.e., accessing its value.

# Multi-dimensional arrays

A 3D array can be considered as an array of '2D arrays'. It works similarly to before, so assuming we have a 3D array `C`, accessing `C[3][2][2]` will return a pointer to the element at the 4th element of the first array, the 3rd element of the 2nd array, and the 3rd element of the 3rd array.

