#pointers #memory #malloc

# Re-cap of application memory

When a program runs, some memory space is allocated for that program. In that memory space, there are various parts:

1. Code (text)
2. Static/global variables
3. Stack
4. Heap

"Local" variables are declared inside a function, and live only for the lifetime of that function.

The example code below shows where variables are stored:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
int total; // static/global
int Square(int x)
{
  return x*x; // x stored in stack frame for 'Square'
}

int SquareOfSum(int x, int y)
{
  int z = Square(x+y); // z stored in stack frame for 'SquareOfSum'
  return z;
}

int main()
{
  int a = 4, b = 8; // a and b stored in stack frame for 'main'
  total = SquareOfSum(a, b);
  printf("output = %d\n", total);
}
```


> [!CAUTION]
> Variables should only be stored as global if they are needed in multiple places, and for the lifetime of the program.

The allocation of stack frames happens at runtime. If the space reserved for the stack is exhausted, then you get a 'stack overflow' error.

It is not possible to manipulate the scope of a variable if it is on the stack. Also, if we want to declare a large data type as a local variable, we need to know how large that array is during compile time.

The *heap* lets us solve this problem. The size of the heap is not fixed, and can vary for the lifetime of the application. Here, the programmer has complete control over the lifetime of their variables. However, it comes with its own ramifications. The programmer must ensure that variables stored on the heap are freed at the correct time.

Another term for heap is 'dynamic memory'. Using the heap is called 'dynamic memory allocation'.

> [!NOTE]
> The 'heap' in this context is NOT the data structure called 'heap'. These are two discrete concepts. 'Heap' in this context simply refers to the pool of memory available in your program.

In C, the following functions are used to assign and 'free' memory on the heap:

* `malloc`
* `calloc`
* `realloc`
* `free`

These functions are in `stdlib.h`, so you will need to `#include <stdlib.h>` to use them in your program.

And in C++, there are some additional keywords that can be used:

* `new`
* `delete`

To store something in the heap, we use the `malloc` function:

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
int main()
{
  int a; // goes on the stack
  int *p;
  p = (int*)malloc(sizeof(int));
  free(p);
}
```

`malloc` returns a void pointer, so we cast it to an `int` pointer instead. So, at the moment, `p` is a pointer to some space on the heap that we can fill up.

To assign some data in the heap, we have to dereference the pointer to access its value:

```c
*p = 10;
```

This assigns the memory pointed to by `p` the value of `10`.

These memory blocks are **not** automatically freed when a stack frame is finished. We need to use `free` to free up that block of memory.

To store an array on the heap, we must make sure that we call `malloc` with the length of the array, multiplied by the `sizeof` the types inside the array, e.g.:

```c
p = (int*)malloc(20 * sizeof(int));
```

If `malloc` is not able to find free space, or cannot assign memory on the heap for any reason, it returns `NULL`, so this is also to be considered.

