#malloc #calloc #realloc #free #dynamic-memory

`malloc`, `calloc` and `realloc` allocate blocks of memory in C.
`free` deallocates blocks of memory.

`malloc`'s signature asks you for the size of the memory block you want ot allocate, in number of bytes. It has a type `size_t` which is an unsigned (only ever positive) type. It can be a very large number.

`malloc` will return us a pointer to the first byte of the memory block it has allocated for you.

We usually want to calculate the size of the memory block we want beforehand. Most often, we use the `sizeof` builtin so that we can get the size of the data type we're asking for. We can perform additional arithmetic on the return value of the `sizeof` call.

For example, if we wanted to allocate enough memory space for 3 integers, we could use `malloc(3 * sizeof(int))`.

`malloc` returns a `void` pointer, which is only ever used as a generic data type. We should cast our `malloc` call to the type of pointer we want, e.g.,

`int *p = (int*)malloc(3 * sizeof(int));`

In dynamically-allocated memory, accessing happens via the pointers.

# `calloc`

`calloc` is very similar to `malloc`. However, it takes 2 arguments instead of one. The first argument is the number of blocks you would like, and the second argument is the size of each block you want.

`calloc` also 'initialises' the memory blocks it allocates, unlike `malloc`. It will initialise your block by setting all the values to 0.

# `realloc`

We use `realloc` to reallocate blocks of memory. `realloc` takes 2 arguments. The first argument is the pointer to the starting address of your existing block. The second argument is the size of the new memory block you want.

# Using the functions

Let's say we have a program that asks the user to input the size of an array.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
int main()
{
  int n;
  printf("Enter size:\n");
  scanf("%d", n);
  int A[n]; // would crash! We can't allocate the size of an array like this during runtime.
}
```

Instead, we can dynamically allocate this memory via `calloc`.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
int main()
{
  int n;
  printf("Enter size:\n");
  scanf("%d", n);
  int *A = (int*)calloc(n, sizeof(int)); // this is ok!
}
```

# `free`

Dynamically-allocated memory remains allocated for the lifetime of your program, until it is explicitly `free`d. However, you can still access that memory space after `free`ing your memory block, but you will just observe garbage values. This behaviour varies between compilers.

